Monthly report January 2025 (#20)
cardano-scaling/website: monthly/2025-01-monthly.md

- Capability to restore a partial Cardano database instead of the full one (by providing the range of missing immutable files)
- Capability to support an evolutive range of artifact storages, and in particular decentralized storages (e.g. IPFS or Bittorrent).

![Design of the incremental certification of the Cardano database](./img/2025-01-mithril-cardano-db-incremental-certification.jpg)
<small><center>Design of the incremental certification of the Cardano database</center></small>

![Signature and verification of the Cardano database](./img/2025-01-mithril-cardano-db-incremental-signature-verification.jpg)
<small><center>Signature and verification of the Cardano database</center></small>

### Website new structure

We have restructured the main sections of the website:

- the [**User manual**](https://mithril.network/doc/manual/welcome) section has been restructured to make the content more accessible and provide entries for each user profile
- the [**About Mithril**](https://mithril.network/doc/mithril/intro) section has been restructured to provide information for beginner and advanced user audiences.

### SPO participation

> We have worked on a plan to reach the full participation of SPOs in the Mithril network, which is essential for the security of the protocol:
> 
> - **Phase 0: Guild Operators’ scripts adjustment**
>   - Install Mithril by default (currently opt-in)
> - **Phase 1: Node integration**
>   - Bundle Mithril with Cardano Node
>   - Seamless integration
>   - Opt-out option
> - **Phase 2: Centralized Incentive Mechanism**
>   - Centralized reward distribution
>   - Treasury funded via external funds
> - **Phase 3: On-chain Incentive Mechanism**
>   - On-chain reward distribution mechanism
>   - Treasury funded through revenues.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have worked on a plan to reach the full participation of SPOs in the Mithril network, which is essential for the security of the protocol:

- **Phase 0: Guild Operators’ scripts adjustment**
  - Install Mithril by default (currently opt-in)
- **Phase 1: node integration**
  - Bundle Mithril with the Cardano node
  - Seamless integration
  - Opt-out option
- **Phase 2: centralized incentive mechanism**
  - Centralized reward distribution
  - Treasury funded via external funds
- **Phase 3: on-chain incentive mechanism**
  - On-chain reward distribution mechanism
  - Treasury funded through revenues.
```

### Protocol status

> The protocol has operated smoothly on the `release-mainnet` network, with the following metrics:
> 
> - **Registered stakes**: `4.9B₳` (`25%` of the Cardano network)
> - **Registered SPOs**: `250` (`9%` of the Cardano network)
> - **Full Cardano database restorations**: `600` restorations
> - **Signer software adoption**: `94%` of the SPOs are running a recent version (one of the last 3 releases).
> 
> More information is available at the [**Mithril Protocol Insights Dashboard**](https://lookerstudio.google.com/s/mbL23-8gibI).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The protocol has operated smoothly on the `release-mainnet` network with the following metrics:

- **Registered stake**: `4.9B₳` (`25%` of the Cardano network)
- **Registered SPOs**: `250` (`9%` of the Cardano network)
- **Full Cardano database restorations**: `600` restorations
- **Signer software adoption**: `94%` of the SPOs are running a recent version (one of the last three releases).

More information is available at the [**Mithril protocol insights dashboard**](https://lookerstudio.google.com/s/mbL23-8gibI).
```

## Hydra

> We've released incremental commits in version
> [0.20.0](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/releases/tag/0.20.0).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have released incremental commits in version
[0.20.0](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/releases/tag/0.20.0).
```

[Issues and pull requests closed in January](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/issues?q=is%3Aclosed+sort%3Aupdated-desc+closed%3A2025-01-01..2025-01-31)

![The roadmap with features and ideas](./img/2025-01-hydra-roadmap.png)
<small><center>Snapshot of the new [roadmap](https://github.com/orgs/cardano-scaling/projects/7/views/1) with features and ideas</center></small>

> Notable updates on our [roadmap](https://github.com/orgs/cardano-scaling/projects/7/views/1) this month include:
> 
> - Released incremental commits [#199](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/issues/199)
> - Verifyed custom-ledger support [#1727](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/issues/1727)
> - Full transaction in `SnapshotConfirmed` [#1685](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/pull/1685)
> - Raw CBOR datum in transaction outputs [#1543](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/issues/1543)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This month, notable updates on our [roadmap](https://github.com/orgs/cardano-scaling/projects/7/views/1) include:

- Released incremental commits [#199](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/issues/199)
- Verified custom-ledger support [#1727](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/issues/1727)
- Full transaction in `SnapshotConfirmed` [#1685](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/pull/1685)
- Raw CBOR datum in transaction outputs [#1543](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/issues/1543).
```

### Hydra Doom finale

> On January 24th 2025, the Hydra Doom tournament concluded in the finale happening at the [C-Play Summit event](https://lu.ma/cplay?tk=RqNYcG) at the HyperX Arena in Las Vegas. This was a live e-sports event where the finalists of previous `hydra-doom` stages were battling out a multiplayer deathmatch on-stage using our re-imagination of the 1993 ego-shooter Doom. See also this [hackernoon article](https://hackernoon.com/hydra-achieves-1-million-tps-validating-cardano-as-the-fastest-blockchain) for a high-level summary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On January 24, 2025, the Hydra Doom tournament concluded with its finale at the [C-Play Summit event](https://lu.ma/cplay?tk=RqNYcG) at the HyperX Arena in Las Vegas. This live e-sports event featured finalists from previous hydra-doom stages battling in a multiplayer deathmatch on stage, using our reimagining of the 1993 first-person shooter _Doom_. For a high-level summary, see this [Hackernoon article](https://hackernoon.com/hydra-achieves-1-million-tps-validating-cardano-as-the-fastest-blockchain).
```

> Let's look a bit under-the-hood of what we had deployed for this finale: Previous installments of the `hydra-doom` application were processing player inputs and games state updates as cardano transactions on a fleet of remotely hosted `hydra-node` processes and Hydra heads. This time, our fork of the doom [doom-wasm](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/doom-wasm) port was using Hydra to create a [`net_module_t`](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/doom-wasm/blob/9375223120772539e21165907cff8a1a9cf19bc3/src/net_hydra.c#L193-L196) that converts doom multiplayer network packets to cardano transactions and uses the Cardano ledger in a Hydra head to exchange them between multiple players. On top of this, the kills of each player were also recorded "on-chain" from similar transactions as used in the past. This allowed us to have a referee Hydra participant use the datum on-chain to update a "Series" smart contract and gather kill totals as a datum in a Cardano UTxO (on the L2).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let’s look a bit under the hood at what was deployed for this finale. Previous installments of the `hydra-doom` application processed player inputs and game state updates as Cardano transactions on a fleet of remotely hosted `hydra-node` processes and Hydra heads. This time, our fork of the _Doom_ [doom-wasm](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/doom-wasm) port used Hydra to create a [net_module_t](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/doom-wasm/blob/9375223120772539e21165907cff8a1a9cf19bc3/src/net_hydra.c#L193-L196) that converts _Doom_ multiplayer network packets to Cardano transactions and uses the Cardano ledger in a Hydra head to exchange them between multiple players. On top of this, each player’s kills were also recorded 'on-chain' from similar transactions as used in the past. This allowed a referee Hydra participant to use the datum on-chain to update a 'Series' smart contract and gather kill totals as a datum in a Cardano UTXO (on layer 2).
```

> Given the result of 3 deathmatch rounds, a winner was determined and all finalists were given prize tokens for 1st to 4th place. These tokens were minted before the finale on the L1, committed into the head and distributed to known finalist addresses _in the head_. Closing and finalizing this head onto mainnet was actually distributing the prize NFTs. The head id of the tournament was `d3ad8ab3bbaf06ccadd7076ff3a84eaca0771bb9dcea8bcce239eca9` and you can see [associated transactions here](https://cexplorer.io/policy/d3ad8ab3bbaf06ccadd7076ff3a84eaca0771bb9dcea8bcce239eca9/tx#data) and [this is the fanout transaction](https://cexplorer.io/tx/09010ab28996c6e75fb3fcda998f7190d71357eec31a110906bfdb6127a23392) distributing the prize tokens. Using these tokens, the winners could redeem the prize money from smart contracts into which we locked the USDM prize money of the finale as can be seen [here for the 1st place tropy](https://cexplorer.io/tx/99864dd973d1fe45e69e8b94dbbca4a4533b60dbe34517d1c8d8928fbabd945b).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Given the results of three deathmatch rounds, a winner was determined, and all finalists received prize tokens for 1st to 4th place. These tokens were minted before the finale on layer 1, committed into the head, and distributed to known finalist addresses _in the head_. Closing and finalizing this head onto mainnet effectively distributed the prize NFTs.

The tournament’s head ID was `d3ad8ab3bbaf06ccadd7076ff3a84eaca0771bb9dcea8bcce239eca9`, and you can view the [associated transactions here](https://cexplorer.io/policy/d3ad8ab3bbaf06ccadd7076ff3a84eaca0771bb9dcea8bcce239eca9/tx#data). [This is the fanout transaction](https://cexplorer.io/tx/09010ab28996c6e75fb3fcda998f7190d71357eec31a110906bfdb6127a23392) that distributed the prize tokens.

Using these tokens, the winners could redeem their prize money from smart contracts where the USDM prize money for the finale was locked, as seen [here for the 1st place trophy](https://cexplorer.io/tx/99864dd973d1fe45e69e8b94dbbca4a4533b60dbe34517d1c8d8928fbabd945b).
```

### Incremental commits

> The incremental commits feature has been released version 0.20.0. We invite community members to test-drive this feature. The goal is to ensure the best user experience and identify potential bugs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The incremental commits feature has been released in version 0.20.0. We invite community members to test-drive this feature. The goal is to ensure the best user experience and identify potential bugs.
```

### Hydra + custom ledger experiment

> We've verified that we can run a Hydra Head with a [customised L2
> ledger](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/issues/1727). [We merged a
> test](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/pull/1796) that can be used for
> future interested parties to test this with their own forks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have verified that we can run a Hydra head with a [customized layer 2
ledger](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/issues/1727). [We merged a
test](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/pull/1796) that can be used for
future interested parties to test this with their own forks.
```
